A little over a week ago, subscribers to my newsletter were asked to share some of their biggest questions regarding the on-going COVID-19 pandemic.Hundreds of questions were submitted, ultimately laying the groundwork for what we think might become an on-going series. Today's episode will feature just a few of the more interesting ones.Below you can find a summary of the topics Dr. Rhonda Patrick addressed in the Q&A. However, there are many more details discussed in this episode that are not summarized here.Some of the questions we selected from the batch to cover in this episode include:

00:02:36 - Are children and infants susceptible to COVID-19? Are some more susceptible to a more severe form of the disease? Are they carriers of it and possibly spreading transmission?
00:11:00 - Can you explain a little about hydroxychloroquine as possibly treating COVID-19? How does it work? Does it have to do with it being a zinc ionophore?
00:17:58 - Can you talk about quercetin's role as a zinc ionophore? 
00:20:51 - Is there any indication blood type influences COVID-19 risk?
00:24:52 - Would you shed light on the conversation regarding vitamin D upregulating ACE2 receptors and vitamin D's influence on susceptibility to COVID19 infection?
00:43:45 - Can you discuss whether sauna use might help prevent COVID19?
00:52:55 - Is it true that high dose intravenous vitamin C might help treat COVID-19?
01:04:35 - What are your thoughts on melatonin being a potential factor to impacting the severity of the virus via its effects on inflammation and oxidative stress?

SummaryOn December 31, 2019, public health experts in China's Hubei province reported a cluster of unexplained pneumonia-like infections to the World Health Organization's China Country Office. That early report of a small, local epidemic of lower respiratory illness has since evolved into a global pandemic now known as coronavirus disease 2019, or COVID-19, an infection attributed to SARS-CoV-2, a novel coronavirus. Coronaviruses are members of the Coronaviridae family. SARS-CoV-2 is one of seven coronaviruses known to infect humans. Others include SARS-CoV-1 (which causes severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS) and MERS-CoV (which causes Middle East respiratory syndrome, or MERS). COVID-19 is a respiratory disease with a clinical spectrum that ranges from no or few symptoms to acute respiratory failure, sepsis, and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. At the time of this writing in early April 2020, the worldwide death toll from COVID-19 has exceeded 115,000 people. Epidemiologists, public health experts, and infectious disease specialists expect that number to grow at a nearly exponential rate over the coming weeks before peaking. The disease has rocked global health, economic, and political systems.Gaining a viral foothold in cellsSARS-CoV2 exploits the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, or ACE2, receptor to gain entry into cells. The ACE2 receptor is widely distributed among the body's tissues but is particularly abundant in lung alveolar epithelial cells and small intestine enterocytes. The virus binds to a cell's ACE2 receptor and injects its genetic material – RNA – into the cytosol. Once inside, the viral RNA molecules are translated to produce RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (also known as replicase), the enzyme critical for the reproduction of RNA viruses. Essentially, the virus hijacks the body's natural replicating processes to promote viral reproduction. The viral RNA is then packaged into infective virion particles and released from the cell to infect neighboring cells.Association between blood type and COVID-19A question that is perhaps at the forefront of the public's mind is this: What factors increase the risk for developing COVID-19? As with any viral infection, older age and the presence of underlying health conditions are known risk factors for COVID-19. But some evidence suggests that a person's blood type might make them more susceptible to developing the disease. Blood types have previously been implicated in the susceptibility to other viral infections. For example, in the related SARS-CoV-1 virus, type A antibodies (as found in O and B blood types) can provide protection by inhibiting the interaction between the virus and ACE2 receptors. Similarly, data suggest that people with blood type A might have a higher risk of developing COVID-19, but people with blood type O have a lower risk. Understanding how COVID-19 affects childrenA huge concern for epidemiologists is the effect of COVID-19 in pediatric populations. Children are largely unaffected by COVID-19 illness, remaining disease-free or manifesting few or mild clinical signs and symptoms. Consequently, children, who account for nearly 5 percent of COVID-19 diagnoses, might be inadvertent vectors for the disease. Understanding how the infection affects children is critical to preventing the further spread of the disease. Evidence suggests that certain subgroups of children could be at greater risk for developing COVID-19, including those who are younger, have respiratory problems, or are immunocompromised. Another concern is the risk of mother-to-child transmission of disease, also known as vertical transmission, which can occur during pregnancy. Several viruses, including hepatitis B, herpes varicella-zoster (chickenpox), and human immunodeficiency virus, can be passed via vertical transmission. However, case reports and retrospective studies indicate that SARS-CoV-2 is not transmittable from pregnant mothers to their infants at birth, but Caesarean delivery and quick isolation likely reduce exposure. While infants born to mothers with COVID-19 have not tested positive for the SARS-CoV-2, virus-specific antibodies have been detected in neonatal blood sera samples.Hydroxychloroquine as a potential therapeutic for COVID-19The emergence of a novel virus such as SARS-CoV-2 has challenged healthcare providers, who have sought equally novel means of treating COVID-19. Unfortunately, the data to support the use of treatments for COVID-19 are limited and inconclusive. A great deal of attention has been focused on hydroxychloroquine, an old, inexpensive drug with a known safety profile and few interactions and side effects. Originally utilized as an antimalarial therapeutic, hydroxychloroquine is now also used to treat rheumatoid arthritis and lupus. The drug has demonstrated in vitro activity against several viruses, including coronaviruses and influenza, but previous randomized trials in people with influenza have been negative. Although the drug is well-tolerated, it does carry safety concerns, including the risk for retinal damage and cardiovascular complications such as irregular heart rhythms. Only well-designed randomized clinical trials will demonstrate hydroxychloroquine's true effectiveness as a treatment for COVID-19. Another possible candidate is quercetin, a polyphenolic compound present in onions, green tea, apples, berries, and other edible plants. Quercetin exerts anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and anti-viral properties and might improve immune function. It is safe, well-tolerated, and is already an FDA-approved drug ingredient. Although the compound has not been clinically tested against SARS-CoV-2, clinical trials are beginning, with outcomes expected in a few months. The mechanism by which hydroxychloroquine and quercetin exert their beneficial effects might lie in their capacity to serve as ionophores. Ionophores are compounds that can transport ions across a lipid membrane. Of particular relevance in viral disease is the movement of zinc, an essential nutrient that inhibits the action of RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, described above. Essentially, zinc blocks the replication of viruses. However, zinc is a positively charged ion and cannot enter cells without a transporter. Hydroxychloroquine and quercetin are known ionophores.

For an interesting discussion on the zinc ionophore activity of chloroquine in the context of coronavirus, watch coronavirus update #34 from Medcram on YouTube.

Vitamin D and respiratory tract infectionsVitamin D is a steroid hormone. It is available in small quantities in food, but the primary source is via endogenous synthesis. This process occurs in a stepwise manner that starts in the skin following exposure to ultraviolet light and continues in the liver and kidneys, where the vitamin's active hormone form is made. Since ultraviolet light is required for vitamin D synthesis, reduced exposure to the sun or having dark-colored skin impairs vitamin D production. Approximately 70 percent of people living in the United States are vitamin D insufficient and ~30 percent are deficient.Robust evidence suggests that vitamin D is protective against respiratory tract infections. Data from 25 randomized controlled trials from around the world demonstrate that daily or weekly supplementation of vitamin D reduced the risk of acute respiratory infection by more than 50 percent in people with low baseline vitamin D levels. People with higher baseline vitamin D levels also benefited, although the effect was more modest, with only a 10 percent risk reduction. Vitamin D and the renin-angiotensin-systemSARS-CoV-2 virus enters human cells via the ACE2 receptor. Viral particles bind to the ACE2 receptor and together they are internalized into the cell. These viral particles can bind to a large number of ACE2 molecules, sequestering the ACE2 molecules from the cell surface and decreasing ACE2. This accompanying loss of ACE2 function can cause serious health consequences due to ACE2's participation in key physiological processes. This also occurs with infection via SARS-CoV-1, which also binds to the ACE2 receptor, decreasing cellular ACE2 expression levels and increasing disease severity.Vitamin D deficiency leads to overexpression of renin (an enzyme produced in the kidneys) and subsequent activation of the renin-angiotensin-system, a critical regulator of blood pressure, inflammation, and body fluid homeostasis. Disturbances in this system due to the loss of ACE2 function in the setting of SARS-CoV-2 infection can promote neutrophil infiltration, excessive inflammation, and lung injury. Once lung infection progresses to hypoxia, renin is released, setting up a vicious cycle for decreasing ACE2. Lower levels of ACE2 promote more damage, culminating in acute respiratory distress syndrome, or ARDS. Vitamin D acts as an endocrine repressor of the renin-angiotensin-system by downregulating the expression of renin, the rate-limiting enzyme of the renin-angiotensin cascade. In a preclinical model of acute lung injury, administration of the active form of vitamin D provided protection against lung injury by balancing the renin-angiotensin-system via increasing ACE2 levels and decreasing renin production. It is important to note that the acute lung injury itself led to a decrease in ACE2 and this resulted in worse disease outcomes. The vitamin D increased ACE2 receptor levels only in conditions of acute lung injury where ACE2 levels decreased. When vitamin D was given to control animals, it did not cause an increase in ACE2 receptor levels. This means that vitamin D normalizes ACE2 receptor levels in situations where it is downregulated.Since vitamin D insufficiency is widespread (and perhaps exacerbated in quarantine conditions, due to limited sunlight exposure), supplemental vitamin D might be a viable means to increase vitamin D to sufficient levels.Intravenous vitamin C Vitamin C, also known as ascorbic acid, is an essential nutrient, widely recognized for its antioxidant properties. For the past several decades, intravenous vitamin C has been used as an effective antiviral agent for the treatment of multiple types of viral infections such as herpes zoster (shingles), herpes simplex (cold sores), herpes varicella-zoster (chickenpox), influenza, measles, and mumps, among others.Oral vitamin C uptake in the gut is limited due to saturable transport mechanisms. Intravenous vitamin C bypasses these mechanisms, however. Consequently, the bioavailability of intravenous vitamin C is 30 to 70 times higher than the same oral dose, which might translate to different biological outcomes. For example, while vitamin C acts primarily as an antioxidant at physiological concentrations of approximately 50 micromoles per liter, pharmacologic doses of intravenous vitamin C greater than 1 gram generate hydrogen peroxide, a type of reactive oxygen species produced by neutrophils to destroy pathogens such as viruses.Intravenous vitamin C's effectiveness in treating viral infections is also likely due to its ability to enhance the immune system. Vitamin C is highly concentrated in immune cells, with neutrophils and leukocytes having 50 to 100 times higher vitamin C concentrations than plasma.Furthermore, some studies have observed that in critically ill patients such as those with severe viral infections, plasma levels of vitamin C might be less than 25 percent of those observed in healthy people.It is noteworthy that there are no published studies on the effect of intravenous vitamin C on COVID-19. However, some anecdotal evidence suggests that it might be beneficial in treating the disease. For example, intravenous vitamin C reduced mortality in patients with sepsis and ARDS, two complications associated with severe COVID-19. An ongoing trial in China will likely provide more evidence to support or discount the efficacy of intravenous vitamin C against COVID-19. Possible links between melatonin and the NLRP3 inflammasomeMelatonin is a hormone produced in the pineal gland of the brain. It regulates the sleep-wake cycle and the expression of more than 500 genes in mammals. Melatonin production is markedly reduced in older adults. Some evidence suggests that melatonin modulates the NLRP3 inflammasome. Inflammasomes are large, intracellular complexes that detect and respond to internal and external threats. Activation of inflammasomes has been implicated in a host of inflammatory disorders. SARS-CoV-1, the virus that caused the original SARS, activates the NLRP3 inflammasome, triggering NF-kB and a cytokine storm in the lungs. During a cytokine storm, an excessive immune response ravages healthy lung tissue and drives acute respiratory failure. Melatonin exerts anti-inflammatory and antioxidative properties that protect against respiratory failure associated with other viral pathogens in animal studies. For example, melatonin ameliorates respiratory syncytial virus‐induced lung inflammatory injury in mice via inhibition of oxidative stress and proinflammatory cytokine production. Additionally, two clinical studies have shown that melatonin exerts antioxidant and anti-inflammatory actions in the lungs of newborns with respiratory distress syndrome. Melatonin treatment reduced proinflammatory cytokines and improved the clinical outcome.Sauna use and immunityNo data suggest that sauna use or other modalities of heat stress such as steam showers or hot baths will have any effect on COVID-19 illness. However, robust evidence suggests that sauna use promotes mild hyperthermia, which, in turn, induces a wide array of beneficial physiological responses. These responses reduce oxidative stress and inflammation and activate cellular defense systems such as heat shock proteins, which provide protection against many diseases. Data from a 2017 study suggest that sauna use reduces the risk of developing certain chronic or acute respiratory illnesses, including pneumonia, by up to 40 percent. Sauna use reduced the incidence of common colds in 25 participants who used the sauna one to two times per week for six months compared to 25 controls who did not. It is noteworthy that it took three months before sauna use had a protective effect. The mechanism by which frequent sauna use reduces the incidence of pneumonia and colds is unknown but might be related to modulation of the immune system. Levels of white blood cells (especially lymphocytes, neutrophils, and basophils) are increased in both trained and non-athletes after sauna use. While these findings are interesting, they are still preliminary and larger studies are needed to confirm. Increasing evidence suggests that certain heat shock proteins play a role in both innate and adaptive immunity. Heat shock proteins can directly stimulate innate immune responses, such as the maturation and activation of dendritic cells and the activation of natural killer cells. This indicates there may be a direct role for heat shock proteins in regulating the innate immune response, which plays an important role in the body's ability to fight off a disease that it has never been exposed to before. 

Learn more about sauna use and immunity in our overview article.

Look for a second COVID-19-focused Q&A, coming soon.
