This podcast is with Dr. Dominic D'Agostino, an assistant professor at the University of South Florida in Tampa and all around expert on ketosis.In this episode we discuss...

Dom's efforts at teasing out the differences between induced nutritional ketosis (through a low carbohydrate, high fat diet) and ketosis from the dietary introduction of exogenous ketones, like beta-hydroxybutyrate, especially in the context of therapeutic and performance enhancing effects. 
His work on formulating ketone esters. 
The differences in tolerability between MCT (medium chain triglycerides) powders versus liquids, as well as the amount of supplemental MCT a person would need to consume to achieve mild ketosis without carbohydrate restriction. 
The differences between different types of ketogenic diets. 
The modified atkins diet which has been demonstrated to have similar efficacy to the classical ketogenic diet in the treatment of drug-resistant epilepsy and how it may be a slightly more practical option for achieving therapeutic nutritional ketosis. 
The importance of making the correct carbohydrate choices, even and maybe especially in the context of a ketogenic diet, with a diverse variety of raw vegetables being the most favorable. 
What keto-adaptation is and what it means, at a physiological level, to be keto-adapted and how this is distinguished from short periods of ketosis we experience in our day-to-day lives. 
Some of Dom's ideas around cycling various dietary strategies as a way of promoting metabolic flexibility. 
How ketones, when used as a source of energy, may result in a net reduction in the number of damaging reactive byproducts known as reactive oxygen species than what may be produced by other forms of energy metabolism while also producing more ATP from, proportionately, the same amount of oxygen.

... and much more!




                "The ketones themselves are anti-catabolic for protein sparing. So if you're in a state of ketosis, you're protecting gluconeogenic amino acids and skeletal muscle from being degraded." - @DominicDAgosti2
                


                Click To Tweet
              


Learn more about Dr. Dominic D'Agostino

dominicdagostino.com
KetoNutrition.org
@DominicDAgosti2 on Twitter
Dom on Facebook

People mentioned

Craig Thompson
Eric Verdin - episode with Dr. Verdin
Eric Kossoff
George Brooks - episode with Dr. Brooks
Jeff Volek
Joe LaManna
John Freeman
Nate Ward
Stephen Phinney
Stephen Cunnane
Tom Seyfried
Ralph DeBerardinis
Richard Veech

Related episodes

Tim Ferriss on Ketosis, Microbiome, Lyme Disease, and Biomarkers
Peter Attia, M.D. on Macronutrient Thresholds for Longevity and Performance, Cancer and More

