In this video Dr. Rhonda Patrick shares her recipe for low-carb lemon tart and demonstrates how to make it. Lemons are high in over 60 flavonoids and citric acid, which is converted to citrate in the body. Citrate also gets converted into acetyl CoA, which is one of two precursors for the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Acetylcholine is important for REM sleep, learning, and memory. The other precursor for acetylcholine is choline! Egg yolk is high in choline. Choline is also one of the major sources of methyl groups that are important in epigenetics. Finally, choline is also a precursor for phosphatidylcholine, the major component of all cell membranes, which affects the structure, permeability and function of cells and is particularly important in neurons since it plays a role in general neurotransmission. There are certain gene polymorphisms that increase the need for more dietary choline, which is high in eggs and in lemon tart!Carbohydrate content for entire Tart (9-in pan ~8 slices):

total carb: 63.75g 
net carb: 33.75g

... but per slice it is around:

total carb: 8g 
net carb: 4.2g

Crust ingredients:

3/4 cup of coconut flour
4 tbsp melted coconut oil (or olive oil if you prefer)
1 tbsp melted butter
2 eggs
1 tsp stevia
5 tbsp of sliced almonds (optional)

Directions to make the crust:
Mix the melted coconut oil, butter, and eggs together and add to the coconut flour and stevia. Press into a 9 inch pan bake for 5 minutes in pre-heated oven.  Remove and set aside.Lemon filling ingredients:

zest from 5 lemons (I like my lemon TART, you can always adjust the lemon zest to your liking)
~3/4 cup fresh lemon juice
4 tsp stevia
2 tbsp butter
2 tbsp melted coconut oil
2 eggs
2 egg yolks

Directions to make the lemon filling:
Blend lemon juice, lemon zest, and stevia in a blender which should yield ~ 3/4 cup of lemon mixture. Heat up the butter, coconut oil and lemon mixture in a saucepan on medium heat. Meanwhile, whisk the eggs and egg yolk in a small bowl. Add the eggs to the warmed lemon mixture, whisking the entire time. Keep whisking until the mixture thickens (~ 5-7 minutes). Add this directly directly to the crusted pan and bake for 10 min at 350 degrees F. Refrigerate for a few hours or overnight and enjoy!
